Track 10. Ditch blocking. It is a fantastic story just by sending a little digger down
there. In the weird and wonderful world that we live in, it seems funny that today's farmers
are being paid to undo the work they did in the years after the Second World War. Here
at Glass Lynn on the Begallion Estate and elsewhere the Pimliman project is busy blocking
ditches and re-wetting areas of blanket bog. As Clive explains, our knowledge and needs
are different today. I guess you've got to accept the fact that times change and what
society needs changes. What we'd like to do is help the farmers to prevent floods and
to lock up the carbon, make sure the carbon is locked up in their hills in the landscape,
The peat is a result of the dying back of vegetation that grows on the blanket bog and
if this vegetation is healthy and growing then the peat gradually gets deeper and deeper.
That in itself helps to hold more carbon up here and a well-maintained peat bog also holds
an enormous amount of water. So how is a healthy bog maintained? Like many of the species found
here the work is subtle but no less important. What we're doing is we are coming up with
a three tonne digger and we're sending the digger down the ditches and they're scooping
out every now and again they'll scoop out a bit of the ditch and they'll use the peat
that they've scooped to make a pool and with the peat that they've dug out of the pool
they'll use to block the ditch and then they'll trundle on a bit and then they'll do the same
and of course the whole idea then is that instead of having a ditch which drains the
water out into the river causing the flood causing the peat to degrade suddenly you've
got a flooded pool. Beautiful for the dragonflies, beautiful for the little passage birds. So
what you end up with is a string of little pools and little bunds where once there was
a ditch and every time it rains the water seeps from one pool to the next it doesn't
gush it's held it's checked back and it stops that water gushing down into the streams into
the rivers and flooding our lowlands. So it's great you're making habitats for wildlife
you're preventing flooding in the lowlands and you're locking away carbon preventing
the emissions of greenhouse gases. It's a fantastic story just by sending a little digger
down there creating a minimal impact. You wouldn't even notice it if you didn't look
hard and yet providing those three fabulous services. So next time you hear a new story
concerning climate change or flooding perhaps you will think about the work taking place here
return in a few years time and you may even be able to notice the subtle changes taking place.
We do hope you have enjoyed this audio trails production. Continue along the track for vehicles
bearing left at a fork and down to the cattle grid at the turn off to glass lane car park stop
four. Head past the point where you came in on Glyndwr's way and follow the very pothole track
all the way back to the mountain road crossing another cattle grid on the way and a final one
when you reach the road. You can of course retrace your steps past stops two and three
over Voilvadian if you want to but continuing on the main track is shorter and easier.
When you reach the road take care crossing over then turn left and follow it down to the memorial
that will be on your left. Please take great care walking along this road as it gets quite busy at
times. Have a safe journey back to the memorial and then home. Goodbye.